- What made you go back to politics?
- Putin, I'll be very frank with you.
Had Russia not attacked Ukraine,
I would not have run for
president of Finland.
This was built in the 18 hundreds later
when the czar to cover the palace,
and this is mirroring
the Winter Palace in St.
Petersburg, but it's
called the Hall of Mirrors.
So we have the mirrors on the side.
- So do you ever get used to it
or do you sometimes just walk
in and think, wow, this is
- Every morning? Wow, this is,
- Have a seat.
Talk to me about resilience.
- It's something I think we in Finland
know, knows something about.
Actually, it's one of our key words.
It's cso, which is
resilience, perseverance,
grit, stamina.
So you basically, you never
give up, you just have
to keep on pushing and grinding
through the tough stuff.
And I think a lot of fins have
that ingrained into the system
because remember, we're a poor country.
You know, first we were
under Sweden for 700 years,
then under Russia for a
little bit over a hundred.
And when we gained independence in 1917,
we were basically a
poor developing country.
And I think then this sort of
idea of resilience, let's try
to overcome, let's work hard,
came very much a part of,
of finished DNA
and i I, I think I'm still
part of that generation.
- Alexander Sto is the
sitting president of Finland,
but he's also served
as a country's minister
of foreign affairs, prime minister
and minister of finance on a bigger stage,
STO was also a member of
the European parliament,
and more recently he found himself nestled
as an unlikely diplomatic
force between superpowers.
President Stub has a US
president Trump's year on issues
like the Russian War with Ukraine.
In his spare time stub unwinds
with exercise, a lot of it.
He's also competed in Ironman events
and marathons with some
pretty impressive results
for non-pro athlete.
- Var.
- I wanted to ask about your father.
He was someone
that had a huge influence on
your life. What was he like?
- Yeah, definitely still
is. He's 90 years old.
He was the chief talent scout
of the National Hockey League in Europe.
So very much an ice hockey
family, if you will.
My dad was a big influence in the sense
that he taught me a lot of things.
He's always taught me curiosity.
He's tried to teach me patience.
- So you're naturally curious,
but not naturally patient.
- Yeah, I think that's what
my wife would probably say.
I was very much into
sports when I was a kid.
I, you know, first I wanted
to become a professional
ice hockey player,
but my dad probably saw that, oh,
I said, I'm gonna work with that one.
Then I wanted to become
a professional golfer.
That's why I actually went
to study in the States.
And my sort of mission
or academic life or,
or meaning purpose only
started pretty much at
the age of 21.
I mean, before that I left,
I, I lived in a, you know,
teenage abyss I guess in, in many ways.
And, and if you had asked
my friends in high school
elsewhere that, you know,
will Alex go into politics
or will he become president?
They would've probably laughed.
- What, what was your hardest time?
- One of the tough times, to be very frank
with you was when, when
my mother was diagnosed
with epilepsy, when I was
only 10, 11 years old,
I was the first one to
see my mom with a seizure.
So that gives you a different
picture of, you know, your,
your parent in, in one way or another.
But probably the toughest,
toughest time in my life,
and it's only my own
doing was, was from 2014
to 2016 when I was prime minister
and finance minister and
chairman of the party.
You know, probably not in my comfort zone
because domestic politics
was never my thing,
but I, you know, grinded
it out for two years and,
and when I lost an election,
I, I left politics,
but I, I left sort of, you
know, with a high morale
to a certain extent, lessons learned.
And, and my whole idea was,
okay, the time was tough.
I learned something from it,
and I'll never come back
to politics. And here I am,
- I was gonna say.
And then seven years later, here we are
- With Russia, I realized
that wow, you know,
things might happen.
And I felt that sense of duty.
But we talked about it at
home, my wife and, and, and
because we had decided that
we're not gonna do politics.
And she said, well, perhaps
because the security political
situation is what it is,
you should reconsider.
- This is Putin announcing
Russia's full scale invasion
of Ukraine in 2022.
This war is a continuation of
conflicts exploited by Russia,
- Heavily armed wearing camouflage
uniforms of a kind known
to be issued to the Russian military.
A platoon of troops deployed this morning
around the main airport in Crimea,
- Finland shares a 1,340
kilometer border with Russia.
They've been investing in
their defense forces for years.
April 4th, 2023,
Finland officially joined nato.
- If and when the alliance
defines its number one security
threat as being Russia,
we in Finland fully
realize our responsibility.
So my message to all of
our allies here today is
that you can trust us.
- Where do you see Russia going?
- Oh, it's not looking good.
You know, I'm very honest with
you, with the current regime
and with President Putin.
I, I, I don't see a big
change, you know, nations
that don't have a capacity
to deal with their past.
They have a very difficult
time to look into the future.
- The world's marbles
as tiny Finland halts
and holds the giant invader.
Soviets may command the sky of Finland,
but the invader will meet
resistance on finished soil.
- There is this, you know, imperialist DNA
and undertone in Russia,
which doesn't seem to go away.
Russia is built on empire.
That's why Putin talks about the Rumi,
the great Russia borders to
the 18 hundreds, which has,
you know, one language,
one Russia, one religion,
and one leader himself.
So I'm not very hopeful about the
future of Russia right now.
You know, we thought that Russia
and many other countries
in this world would just
automatically revert to some
form of liberal democracy,
but it didn't happen.
For some people who don't
know the Finnish model,
it's the president runs foreign
policy together with the government.
And I'm the only living person
who has been in Finland,
who's been both prime
minister and president
and foreign minister.
So I understand the reality.
It's very situation when you're president
and dealing with foreign policy
and foreign policy for a country like
Finland is existential.
Everyone wants the president to succeed.
Ukraine wants peace, Finland wants peace.
Europe wants peace. The
United States wants peace.
Russia, on the other
hand, still has to show
that it wants a genuine peace.
- The countryside surrounding
this Russian Finnish border is
eerily silent
and still the border closed
in the second half of 2023.
All traffic stopped between
these neighboring countries,
no cars, no pedestrians,
no buses indefinitely.
And the perimeter is manned
by authorities on both sides.
- I'm Captain Anhe, I'm head
of Numar border gas station
days before closing the border.
They were really, really strange and,
and different, totally
compared to times earlier.
The passenger traffic was
concerning mostly to shopping.
So Russian tourists went to
a southeastern Finland area
for shopping, for spending
weekends in hotels, et cetera.
So the economical impact has
been really, really big.
Unfortunately,
- LA Penta is a city of 73,000
and just over 20 kilometers
from the Russian Finnish border.
It was a big destination
spot for Russian tourists.
Some estimate the South
Korea region where Lata
is located has lost about 1
million euros a day since Russia
began its war against Ukraine.
- I have been living here all my life.
The cafe started on 1980s
when this house was built.
We were under Russian rule,
and this was built for as a house
for young Russian officer.
We have lots of foreign customers in here,
Russian customers, but
nowadays, not so many anymore.
The economical impact has been huge.
I don't think that they will ever come
to the same point they were before,
before the Ukrainian war.
I can easily hear people
saying that this is something
that Russians do,
and you can re, you can
never rely on Russians.
And that makes me very sad
because in my opinion,
the, like the Russian
administration and Russian
people are so different.
But there are two different
sides of this story.
- You grew up in, in a era
where, you know, globalization
was an opportunity and now
people are looking more inwards.
- True. But you could say
that I was born into a world,
the Cold War, where there
was a clear ideological split
between the east and the west, you know,
authoritarian regimes and freedom.
And remember I started studying
in 1989 when the Berlin War
fell in November,
and then the Soviet
Union collapsed in 1991.
And there was this sort of
basic assumption that, hey,
the whole world is gonna be a combination
of liberal democracy,
social market, economy,
and globalization.
Then of course, at some
stage we sort of woke up
and smelled the coffee and realized that
actually the world was not
gonna be all about green fields
and, you know, rainbows and peace signs.
And, and for me, of
course the, the, the sort
of turning point was not only nine 11
or the financial crisis 2008,
but probably Russia's
attack on Ukraine in 2022.
And we're now starting
to see the change of a,
of a world order.
- But you, you say in 2008
you saw Russia change,
- But let's all try to stay
calm, cool, and collected.
There's a lot of this war
propaganda going around.
We've been able to master a ceasefire
and let's try to stick to it.
Thanks. Thank you. I gave a
speech right after the war.
We had gotten a ceasefire
in five days where I said,
you know, we should
wake up and have a look.
Power politics is back,
spheres of interest is back.
Russian imperialism is not
gone. So start adjusting.
And of course, you know, it
wasn't a very kosher thing
to say at the time, but, but,
and I, I'm, I'm, you know, I'm
not happy that I was right,
but that's what happened.
- But no one listened.
- Well, I mean,
some people listened, some
didn't, you know, I, I think kind
of a lot of eastern European
countries were right about
Russia at, at that time.
But I think we were all
sort of in this wave of,
yeah, you know, Russia is
gonna become a democracy.
We were even thinking China
is gonna become a democracy
and you know, if there is
technological advancement,
if there is freedom,
people are gonna use it.
There was Arab Spring,
et cetera, et cetera.
But my argument, big argument is
that right now we are
living in a 19 18, 19 45
or 1989 moment in, in world history,
and now we're in a similar situation.
We just don't know where
the world is gonna go.
- Jon GRE sits on Ante's
city council, like stub
before the presidency.
JOAs is also a member
of the National Coalition
Party in Finland.
- I do have Russian friends
and none of them is
anymore living in Russia.
They are losing now a lot of brain power.
Everybody who can live leaves
Finland have been preparing for 80 years
after second World War
against any foreign threats.
Everybody understands
why the border is closed,
but it's economically quite hard.
The most important thing
is that we survive,
whatever happens, we will
survive, we will do our best.
We have been living
next to Russia thousands
and thousands of years,
and it has been a struggle all the time.
Only nowadays Europe is
also seeing that living next
to Russia can be a problem.
- You, you've also said that
Europeans live in la la land
that they actually don't
want to see, I guess
what they have in front of them.
Why is it so difficult to see? Yeah,
- It's, it's one of these
things I think sometimes it's,
it's very, it's very human.
You know, we, we, we wanna
deal with a world that we want
to see and we are not
dealing in a world which it
actually exists.
Remember that diplomacy
and foreign policy is, is is never static.
There's no end state.
You know, we're not gonna end up
with the fantastic world government.
It's always diplomacy
and trying to work in
different directions.
Right now, the pendulum is
going to towards transaction,
towards nationalism,
towards bilateral relations.
And at some stage it'll
start swinging back.
But when it starts, we have to make sure
that everyone feels
that they're part of it.
- The golden age of
America begins right now.
I will very simply put America first.
We are at the start of a thrilling new era
of national success.
Sunlight is pouring over the
entire world. We'll be told
- That it's xenophobic, we'll be told
that it's small minded.
- Do you worry about
society splintering the
rise of populism?
The, yeah, definitely not being
able to talk to each other anymore.
- Yeah, I mean, what we have
to avoid is the polarization of society.
We have now the technological
instruments to polarize
as much as we can because we can kind
of start living in not only
al alternative realities,
but in alternative truths.
And that's very dangerous for democracy
because if you don't
have basic agreement of
what facts are say on science or
otherwise, then you cannot
have a democratic discourse.
And, and we have to try to avoid that.
We're seeing some of it
obviously in the United States,
but it's not only the United States.
We're seeing it in many
other liberal democracies.
Finland is a small country.
We can't ev you know, we can't have that.
- Is Europe prepared to go to war?
- Well, I mean, our mentality is that
the better you prepare,
the less likely you're
gonna end up in, in a war.
- Finland has a larger
artillery than France
and Germany combined,
despite being a small country
with a fraction of the German
and French population per capita.
Finland ranks seventh
in the world in total
military personnel number.
- We have obligatory military service,
so 900,000 men and
women that have done it.
My son just finished his,
I did mine in 1988 and 89.
We have 280,000
that we can put out at
wartime from reserves.
We have 62 F eighteens, we
have long range mass cells,
land C and air, we just
bought 64 F 30 fives.
We have the biggest artillery
together with Poland.
And as I always say, we don't have them
because we're worried about Stockholm.
And our argument is that
the better you're prepared,
the less likely you're end up.
- But the rest of Europe is not prepared.
- Well, I think many of them are,
and many of them are waking up.
We are increasing our
preparedness in order
to avoid the worst.
- I mean, I'm sure you have
good days and bad days.
What do you do on a bad day to, to try
and work things through on to
try and keep a level headed?
- I mean, one, you have to be
really well prepared yourself.
So I spend my early morning
hours from about five
to eight going through material
and reading to make sure that
I'm, you know, on the ball.
And then secondly, you have
to have a team which is able
to inform you about every
little minute detail and,
and keep you all the
time ahead of the curve.
And then number three,
you have to calm down.
You know, you have to understand
that the world is not gonna
be finished in the six years I
I'm in this office, or 12 years
depending on if I run again.
You just have to take it day
by day and, and, and, and, and,
and try to, you know, solve
small crisis and big crisis.
- What, what do you learn from sports
that you bring to politics?
- You, you probably
learn to cut your losses
and actually to accept failure
because in life you're gonna go
through moments when you fail and,
and you know, then you either learn
something from it or you don't.
And from indoor sports, you
just learn how to grind it out.
So sports, I have to admit,
has always helped me.
It's, it's a big part of who I am.
- Yeah. And, and you famously
said that actually one hour
of sports or exercise gives
you two hour of energy.
Do we need to normalize that more?
- Well, normalize is difficult
because I never wanna be
judgemental about anyone
else's lifestyle.
So I've been able to lead a
life whereby it's been possible
for the past 20, 30 years.
And I think it's a lot about habits
and then suddenly they
almost become an addiction.
You have to be a, a little bit careful,
but I, I'd say that I'm
probably a better person
for doing one hour of exercise,
albeit today I've only done half an hour.
- And what have you had to adapt
since you become president?
- I think there's certain
behavioral patterns.
You know, you have to perhaps
hide your personality a little
bit, not too much.
But the reason I do it is that
I respect the institution.
You know, I'm the 13th president
of the Republic of Finland.
I understand the historic
gravitas of the task.
So that means that, you know,
I can't in every public situation
be just the good old Alex.
I can do that with my friends,
I can do that with my family,
I can do it with my staff.
But there are certain
elements of, of the job
that you just have to play the role.
- But leaders also connect
through personalities. Yes.
How has that helped with
President Trump? President Xi?
- Well, I mean, it helps with
everyone to a certain extent.
I, I think diplomacy is
really about two things.
It's about state relations
and then it's about personal
relations and connections.
And then I think it's my job
to try to connect with people
and, and I, I hope I, I hope
I succeed sometimes, you know,
I, when I was with President
Xi, I felt we had a very good
and respectful conversation
when I was playing
golf with President Trump.
We had a really good time.
- What was President Trump like
on the golf course? He played
- For pleasure for eight hours.
Very, very, yeah, very talkative.
You know, golf is a nice social setting.
And again, going back to my dad,
I remember my dad being very encouraging
and saying, you know, Alex,
even if you don't become a golf
professional, golf will
be useful for you one day.
And I was going, yeah, sure dad.
And sure enough, there
I was on the first tee
with President Trump and you
know, I I had a good time.
And it doesn't, you know, the
fact that you have a good time
with someone doesn't
mean they agree with him,
especially coming from a small country.
What you wanna do is,
is you wanna, you know,
nudge things in the right direction.
And that means that
you have conversations,
which sometimes can be
difficult and awkward.
Sometimes they can be good.
And, and, and then, you
know, the rest of it is, is,
is about getting results.
And I hope I get results
with my diplomacy,
- But I if you have a
good time, does it mean
that they listen to your arguments more?
- I dunno, you have to ask them,
- What, what do you,
what did you learn about
him? I mean, is he different?
- Actually, you know, this is the thing,
and I've always said
this, that funnily enough,
and I hadn't really
played golf for 35 years.
I mean, when I quit, I quit.
So, but I've always said it,
you learn about the personality
of a human being on the
first hole of a golf course.
You see if they're edgy,
if they're impatient,
if they're frustrated, if
they're fun, if they're relaxed.
And I have to say, I had no
uncomfortable moments during
that round, and we hit
good shots and bad shots.
So, you know,
people are quite different
in a golf course. Sometimes
- You, you seem to have a quite glamorous
life from the outside.
What do people not know?
- What I keep on telling
people who say, oh, you met
that person, you met that person,
and you sat next to that one.
I said, listen, they're
just normal human beings.
See, the thing is that in today's world
with modern technology, you
create an image of a human being
who you've never met because
you've seen them on social
media or TV or whatever, and it's normal.
But the truth is that
no human being is as bad
as they look in the public eye,
nor as good as they
look in the public eye.
And most people that I met
throughout my life are just
normal human beings.
They like to talk about normal stuff.
I'll tell you, one of
the highlights of my term
so far was a private dinner
with President Zelensky
and Zelensky and my wife Suan
at our home in our flat
with no one else around.
We were just chatting
there, drinking wine,
talking about family,
and talking about life.
And you have to understand
that even someone like Flo
Zelensky who's gone through
a war that no one wanted,
and he, the least of it,
is a normal human being.
There's no glamor in that
- Present. Stu, thank you so much.
- Thank you.